---
title: "★ Clément Lambelet: 'The Mathematics of Regression'"
subtitle: "*for* Foam Magazine #66"
year: "2024"
chapter: "iv"
order: 1
---
Walking past my local Asian supermarket, I couldn't help but notice a poster prominently displayed in the entrance's shop window. On it, grainy CCTV footage screenshots captured a grid of individuals, their faces fully exposed, engaged in what appeared to be theft. What struck me was the stark contrast between the predominantly Asian clientele of the shop and the unmistakably Black figures depicted on the poster. It was another jarring reminder of the racial biases embedded within surveillance systems and made me reflect on the broader implications of such technologies.

Enter Clément Lambelet's _The Mathematics of Regression_ (2019-2022). By scrutinising over 55,000 mugshots' sourced from a database utilised by the Unitedstatian justice system, Lambelet sheds light on the complexities of technological power and racist biases rooted within our societal structures. At the core of the project, he confronts the inherent discriminatory practices prevalent within systems like such. Sourcing mugshots from a justice system tainted by systemic biases, _The Mathematics of Regression_ introduces the uncomfortable reality of how such datasets — or in this sense archives — can be manipulated in the digital age.

Generally, we tend to think of diversity in colourful terms; that is, the presence of anyone other than would make something 'diverse'. In the field of machine learning, the linear regression method is used to make forecasts based on past trends. When these projections are calculated from a database that lacks diversity by simply relying on a systemically racist dataset, they reveal the stereotypes and injustices of which Al is the magnifying glass. Here, _The Mathematics of Regression_ serves as a critique of how technology, particularly artificial intelligence, perpetuates and amplifies societal prejudices.

The resulting portraits, generated by an algorithm created by Lambelet him-self, employ techniques such as the superposition of images and lenticular prints to obscure the identities of the subjects. This movement of anonymising the algorithmic 'suspects' not only renders them anonymous — all the more representative of the faceless masses subjected to the whims of automated surveillance — but also helps question the validity of relying on such data for decision-making processes. Over-incarcerated, therefore more often referenced, certain population groups get caught up in endless loops of being booked and kept under surveillance.

Central to the impact of the project is Lambelet's subversion of the intended use of these archival images. Countering the original purpose of these images allows them to be read in a different light and makes me think of artistic-social exercises and experiments like those brought forward by, say, research agency Forensic Architecture's investigations. By employing an Al to categorise the subjects by gender and age, he diverts these portraits from their primary purpose and exposes the latent prejudices embedded within the dataset, laying bare the stereotypical assumptions upon which it is constructed. ‘I see this gesture, of coding the algorithm that will generate and/or assemble the im-age, as another form of photographic practice. It also questions authorship, and in reserve, who is the person in charge of a system', Lambelet tells me. Fittingly, in 2015 during a conversation with artists Adam Broomberg and Oliver Chanarin, founder and director of Forensic Architecture Eyal Weizman noted: "There's potential power lying dormant in every photograph. Once a photograph has been used in a particular way and returned to the archive it has the potential to be read again, its potential will always be [more important than] the particular history that produced it' Revisiting those images, giving them a new lease of life, and providing food for thought might be the push needed to rethink an entire racist infrastructure. The conundrum created by a system fed with inherently biased and racist images that could potentially create a bias against a certain group is nothing new - and resembles very human processes that happen on a daily basis. Yet, the new frontiers that humanless technology could cross in the coming years are, at its best, disturbing and deserving of attention and regulation. It's promising to see researchers like Joy Buolamwini, Trevor Paglen, Adam Har-vey, and Suzanne Kite, each with their own approach, questioning these systems and proposing new ways to critically think about facial recognition and (mass) surveillance technologies.

Unchecked technological power born from the amalgamation of thousands of individual faces — very much like the first iteration of face recognition devices failing to identify Black people as humans — are different steps in the big ladder of dehumanisation of state-of-the-art technologies. In its essence, _The Mathematics of Regression_ operates as a cautionary tale; a warning against the proliferation of technology in domains rife with systemic injustice. It highlights the urgent need for commitment to interrogating the ethics of technology and surveillance, as well as greater scrutiny and accountability in the development and deployment of artificial intelligence, lest we unwittingly become complicit in the perpetuation of discriminatory practices. Lambelet's work invites viewers to confront the uncomfortable truths lurking beneath the veneer of 'technological progress?

<p  class="credit">First published in <em>Foam Magazine</em> #66 <em>Missing Mirror</em>. © Henri Badaröh (2024) </p>