---
title: "★ On the Ethics and Contradictions of the Archive"
subtitle: "*for* Foam Magazine #59 *with* Carollina Lauriano *and* Stephanie Ribeiro"
year: "2021"
chapter: "iv"
order: 5
---
In 1866, German-Brazilian photographer Alberto Henschel (1827-1882) immigrated to Brazil, where he became one of the most successful photographers of the period. Henschel photographed subjects ranging from the Brazilian monarchy and tradespeople to the extravagant 19"-century middle class. However, Henschel's portraits of the African diaspora in Brazil — free and enslaved — are probably amongst his most famous works. Carte de visite style, these photographs are praised by many for the presumably respectful portrayal of a people who, back then, were mostly exoticised or objectified. In the public domain, these images were then found by photojournalist Fernando Banzi, whose colourisation process became the project  _Types_. Banzi attempts to bring these portraits to the present day by using strong colours, traditional garments and a mélange of skin tones.

HENRI BADARÖH: We are dealing here with a set of photographs in which some were supposedly used by slave owners for the trade of slaves. I would love to know how you both felt first looking at Banzi's interventions on these portraits. How do we look at such a loaded archive today?

CAROLLINA LAURIANO: I think Banzi's work permeates a very interesting place for me. Similar to the work of artist Aline Motta, there is a strong relationship with fabulation. Motta, a woman of colour, goes on a quest to retrieve her history. As an exercise of imagination, she sets out to discover her origins starting with just her great-grandmother's name, the only information she possesses. She uses DNA test results and researches into the culture and customs of her African ancestors to fabulate the story of her great-grandmother that, inevitably, ends up writing Motta's own story, I think that through fabulation, personal stories connect with other people's stories, especially when these stories have voids.

HB: Voids created by years and years of Black history erasure, right? It makes me think about how I don't even know my great-grandmother's full name, or how Henschel's portraits only identify those portrayed as types' or"black boy, black woman' — nameless people with no sense of humanity.

CL: In Brazil, your ancestry, your provenance — the possession of a passport that allows you to transit from one country to another is highly prized and usually given to those who came here out of exploration or as refugees But what happens if one comes to this land unwillingly? How to reclaim a passport, an identity, a story then?

STEPHANIE RIBEIRO. This is crucial, indeed. I believe identification is also an exercise in imagination that is frequently stripped from us as Black individuals. It is as if we could never dream or invent something. Life can be so hard on us that dreaming seems like a far-fetched idea. When I look at Banzi’s work, I think a lot about the use of colours. You depart from an image that was originally sepia, with aesthetics that reaffirm its historical framework of suffering, of a people that were never seen as positive references. And then, Banzi adds colour to it — in a moment in history where Brazilian society was thinking a lot about appearance (hair dye, clothing, and the like) as a symbol of resistance.

HB: You mean the early 2010s, correct? 1 remember that moment felt like an ebullition of new ideas, with the younger generations awakening politically and taking charge of the narrative...

SR: Exactly. When he started these interventions in the mid-2010s, it was the first time people actually said "I can use my body to draw attention, I no longer need to hide and be invisible. Banzi's use of different fabrics and textures has turned images that once were invisible into something impossible to ignore. This made total sense to a generation that lacked identification with its past, didn't want to take part in the 'chic and discreet game and demanded to be acknowledged. And through the use of different skin colour tones,  _Types_  refutes the idea that there is only one type of Black skin- something that Banzi had in mind from the beginning, inspired by Angélica Dass' series  _Humanae_. This is most clear to me when I look at the portrait of the albino man, you know, how the colours bring forward life. I believe the colours are a synonym to life, to meaningfulness. I see  _Types_  not only within the context of a possible fabulation, but also trying to engage in the conversations that society was having back then, the new ways of thinking aesthetics, wardrobes, music, etc — with references that go from Afropunk to Afrofuturism.

CL: To fabulate creates new relationships to one's work and also promotes the de-exoticisation of material created by foreign artists who came to the American continent to portray the picturesque, the exotic. So, how does one re-signify these images? How does one free these images? How does one project these images into the now? How to look at these images in a way that makes them belong to those otherised? So, I like to think of Banzi's work in connection to appropriation, fabulation, and freedom. These three words reveal a new mode of identity thinking, that can re-signify what is established and what we understand as reality. Think about the role of images in fashion, television, and advertisement industries; they have the power to reaffirm what is tangible and what is not, who belongs and who doesn't. As an artist, you must think of the impact of images.

HB: How do you look at Banzi’s role, then, that of a white man handling this archive?

CL: Well, at first, when I was invited to look at this material and did some research to understand it properly, it got my goat. Once again, a person who is appropriating a discourse that doesn't belong to them, that might have been taking this as their own to gain social capital. But this is the gut reaction. Then I breathe and think about its context more carefully. I like to think that not everyone is the enemy, that not every white person is reproducing colonial processes. We must be capable of being generous with and towards the other. It is essential to understand how one looks at their own privilege and how one uses this privilege. Some individuals are actually rethinking themselves from their interaction with others. That is, when a white person looks at the work full of exoticism of another white person, and then tries to develop a place for contemplation and reflection, we cannot invalidate this — that would border fascist ideas. We would be enhancing polarised views in a world where everything is so chaotically polarised and segregated already.

HB: But if a white person is talking for themselves, without the aid of competent people to back them up, without listening or problematising together with others, then it inevitably waves a red flag, doesn't it?

CL: Decoloniality exists to teach us a few things. When a white person has a support system around them, peers who can guide them through the process and are able to spot the various, often subtle sensibilities when dealing with such archives, we see the work, we see the intentions and the carefulness. But there are contradictions: sometimes, even though the work is surrounded by good hands, it reaches a level of visibility that when made by others — namely, a Black person — it wouldn't get. Why does that happen? It's paramount to raise these questions in situations when, once again, we have white people listening only to white people. So, this is it: on one hand, there is power in calling out your peers by fabulating with the archive as if their past mistakes are your responsibility, indeed. On the other hand, this work might be circulating more effectively for the simple fact it has been made by a white person.

SR: Banzi seems to be exercising his role as an artist, thinking outside the box, playing with the many possibilities brought up by the archive in a process embedded in genuine curiosity. He is part of Goma Oficina, based in São Paulo. They come from a school that rethinks the role of an architect, and as a collective they not only work with architecture, but also artistic interventions from street art to exhibition, and from books to interior design. Being an architect myself, I have always understood them as very critically engaged towards an architecture and design that doesn't shy away from social and cultural issues. Goma used to be neighbours with Aparelha Luzia [a Black and trans art space / urban quilombo] So when Aparelha was establishing their voice and their blazing aesthetics amidst the occupation movement, Goma was watching it from up close, taking notes, developing a critical thought, observing and trying to understand these new conversations. Back then, when Banzi started his project, we had a different political mindset and context. Now we have the capacity to analyse Banzi's practice with a fresh set of eyes we didn't have at that time.

HB: Absolutely. It seems to me that the ways Brazil and other countries developed in the past decade, or were forced to mature in the light of oppression, adds to how we would look at such work then and now. We were obliged to develop a critical brain never before seen.

SR: Think of the space that we've taken up in such a small period of time. Aparelha Luzia was just beginning, Black literature was starting to be translated to Brazilian Portuguese. Since, we have had exhibitions looking exclusively at the production of Black and Indigenous contemporary artists, we have got access to the books, the theories an intellectual potency that we hadn't seen before. Today, this material has been made visible, established, and incorporated in the country's social fabric.

CL: Of course, but we shouldn't be naive and think that we are always only helping and praising and bringing forward knowledge and acknowledgement. I think it's important to think of images as a place for potential. How to make them part of an active change, how to turn things into tools? Sometimes, there is lack of deep understanding when handling archives so that what is an experiment to some, is sacrilege to others. Sometimes, we talk about things that should not be talked about vainly. Symbols are fundamental, and the relationship with all things sacred should never be made public for the sake of it, at times it is to be kept secret respected. So, it is dangerously naive to say 'l am helping, t am shedding light with my privilege. With the powers vested in the colour of my skin, I will speak for those who cannot: Just like that you may turn a good cause into another chapter of romanticisation or exoticisation.

HB: And how could we prevent this from happening?

CL: We can't tell no one emphatically that they can't do something, but if they do, I think it's fair to say that we expect them to know what they are doing. To turn something public makes it susceptible to questioning and criticism. In my practice, I guide young artists and I expect them to be ready to defend their work adequately. We think together of important ways to tackle the work, for example, always speaking for oneself and not for others and learning how to avoid once again romanticising or exoticising the themes and subjects we deal with. To reflect on these complexities is essential, because a work of art will be processed differently by those sensitive to its content. To constantly question yourself and the relevance of your project and to share the work with others is the way to know whether what you are divulging is going in the right direction.

SR: This is so fascinating, Carollina. It makes me think of Marina Amaral, another artist who's worked with Alberto Henschel's archive. What is curious, however, is to observe people's reactions to her versions. Most of them are saying 'tragic, awful' or 'sad images. Banzi's work, on the other hand, seems to present these cartes de visite with new meanings, new life; despite the fact that their original intent is not something I appreciate.

HB: According to Amaral's website, she colourised the photographs with the aim of humanising and individualising those portrayed.

SR: The way Amaral works with the archive doesn't fulfil me, it's too literal. Banzi’s process places them within a different context, his colourisations have something fantastical about them, something allegorical. I like to see this work from an Afrofuturistic perspective, in which you don't need to wipe out the past and forget all about it, but instead, you can give new values to traumatic experiences. When I saw the images for the first time, I didn't see them as photographs of enslaved people inserted in a colonial process. No, actually saw women who could have been from my family, had life been different. Don't get me wrong, we don't need to fantasise the past, just think that we can allow ourselves to exist outside the realm of reality too. We can let our minds run wild and let our imagination flow. With the aid of elements so different and diverse, it is possible for me to look at these people beyond the original context of enslaved Black people.

HB: Can you give an example?

SR: There is a particular type' that draws my attention: the woman with the high lace collar. Possibly, she was an enslaved woman that, within the contexts of slavery, had achieved some social position as we knew it to be veridical. Both Amaral and Banzi colourised this image, but only sense an aristocratic energy from Banzi's — achieved by the subtle addition of jewellery. Dreaming can be good for us as a people and as society, it departs from the idea that we need to always be clean, and that anything else is tawdry, naff, corny or tacky. What no one actually says is cheesiness is a valid and possible aesthetical choice too. Amaral's colorised process seems to reaffirm the past, whereas Banzi has generated a possibility for imagination. Perhaps, that's easier for Banzi than for Black people. His whiteness is unburdened by the painful aspects tied to the archive, whereas Black people are, many times still, in constant survival mode and unable to think past reality. Actually, this is something that makes me very sad. The fact that we are not allowed to speak in new languages takes from us the access to new forms of expression and empowerment. Living in a country like Brazil, you must be always responding to racism, reaffirming it exists and that slavery really happened - this tiresome process of always being on your guard forbids us, as society, to exercise imagination.

HB: To think ludically, right?

SR: Yes, there is no space for ludical thinking. Even because, in the actual moment of our politics, to think ludically has been weaponised against historical facts and common reality. It's being used to deny and dispute, for instance, slavery.

CL: I think a lot about some sort of image fetishism. The pain and violation of others. How complexly violent it is to live on land stolen from Indigenous peoples? Or when talking about race, the violence of eugenic views - always reaffirming that some part of the population is inferior? As if to say: 'if they come from x, they must belong to y. Sometimes one thinks they are providing freedom, but they are just reinforcing oppression. Just turn the TV on and see it for yourself...

SR: We must remember as well that the original images by Henschel were produced inside a framework that reaffirms their power as objects of suffering: not only for the historical period (slavery) but also for the white gaze that they are built in. There were no Black photographers then. But even now, we have a very disturbing way of understanding storytelling and our collective exercise of imagination still happens within the framework of whiteness. To this day, we have Black writers who are demanded to write about slavery or racial issues or Blackness, otherwise their perspectives are invalidated and delegitimised. These hegemonic narratives ensure that it's still disruptive for a Black person to write, say, a sci-fi story set in the south of Brazil, undoubtedly the whitest part of the country. Whereas in Banzi's case, mused from the beginning: 'what makes a white person want to delve into this archive, and imagine what would have been, these what ifs?. To me, that makes him disruptive in his own way, because he wasn’t trying to construct a narrative per se. For him, at that moment, it was an exercise of creativity, channelling images taken from his everyday life into the archive.

CL: I believe everything stems from a notion of official history, which is told from the perspective of the winner. This said winner draws conclusions about others. So ethnic, racial, and indigenous questions are seen in a reductive way. In a lazy process, what is passed on about those otherised becomes more and more limited. In this system, every African is tribal, every Native American is cannibal. The reaffirmation of these images is aggressive. To want to talk about anything in the world should be possible, yes. Existence is a heavy burden, so sometimes we need to be able to wander away from our identity, and not only ruminate on reaffirming ourselves. I think we are going towards these principles with artists like Rosana Paulino, or my brother Jaime Lauriano, who use these archives and materials to talk about their own history without giving too much space to fallacious ideas of racial democracy, catechised and domesticated bodies. This new generation of artists, through their practice, is thinking of new possibilities for the world without shying away from the acknowledgement of white violence - only this way we can preserve our memory.

HB: And truly think of possible futures, isn't it?

CL: For me, it is important to remember these people's individuality. They have unique needs, desires and visions. We cannot any longer talk about universality - there is multiplicity, Now, we shall talk not about thinking outside the box, but rather, down with the box altogether. Let's think about other cosmovisions, other cosmopolitics, that depart from the so-called white, western, Eurocentric ones.

<p  class="credit">First published in <em>Foam Magazine</em> #59 <em>Histories</em>.</p>